docs/source/index.rst, before:

:sd_hide_title:

.. HTML meta tag to verify aiida.readthedocs.io in Google Search Console (aiidateam account)
.. meta::
   :google-site-verification: wLcoklPmiTRQs5TXRD6At5hNXGYSwexWnx0wygU4Uxk

.. grid::
   :reverse:
   :gutter: 2 3 3 3
   :margin: 1 2 1 2

   .. grid-item::
      :columns: 12 4 4 4

      .. image:: images/aiida-icon.svg
         :width: 200px
         :class: sd-m-auto

   .. grid-item::
      :columns: 12 8 8 8
      :child-align: justify
      :class: sd-fs-5

      .. rubric:: AiiDA

      An open-source Python infrastructure to help researchers with automating, managing, persisting, sharing and
      reproducing the complex workflows associated with modern computational science and all associated data (see :ref:`features<intro>`).

      **aiida-core version:** |release|

------------------------------

.. grid:: 1 2 2 2
   :gutter: 3

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`circle-play;mr-1` Introduction
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Overview of what AiiDA is and what it can do.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: intro/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the introduction

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`rocket;mr-1` Installation
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Installation guides and troubleshooting.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: installation/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the installation guides

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`info-circle;mr-1` Tutorials
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Concrete step-by-step examples.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: tutorials/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the tutorials

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`question-circle;mr-1` How-To Guides
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Learn how to use AiiDA to power your own work.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: howto/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the how-to guides

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`bookmark;mr-1` Topics
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Background information on AiiDA concepts.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: topics/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the topics

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`sitemap;mr-1` Internal Architecture
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Detailed information on AiiDA's design and architecture.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: internals/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the architecture guide

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`puzzle-piece;mr-1` Core plugins
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Commonly used AiiDA plugins to extend core functionality

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: reference/core_plugins
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the plugin overview

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`cogs;mr-1` API Reference
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Comprehensive documentation of CLI, Python API and REST API.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: reference/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the reference guide

------------------------------

.. admonition:: Need support?
   :class: title-icon-code-fork

   For any questions, discussions and requests for support, please visit the `Discourse forum <https://aiida.discourse.group>`__.


.. admonition:: Development Contributions
   :class: title-icon-code-fork

   Saw a typo in the documentation? Want to improve the code?
   Help is always welcome, get started with the `contributing guidelines <https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/wiki>`__.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :hidden:

   intro/index
   installation/index
   tutorials/index
   howto/index
   topics/index
   internals/index
   reference/core_plugins
   reference/index

===========
How to cite
===========

If you use AiiDA for your research, please cite the following work:

.. highlights:: Sebastiaan. P. Huber, Spyros Zoupanos, Martin Uhrin, Leopold Talirz, Leonid Kahle, Rico Häuselmann, Dominik Gresch, Tiziano Müller, Aliaksandr V. Yakutovich, Casper W. Andersen, Francisco F. Ramirez, Carl S. Adorf, Fernando Gargiulo, Snehal Kumbhar, Elsa Passaro, Conrad Johnston, Andrius Merkys, Andrea Cepellotti, Nicolas Mounet, Nicola Marzari, Boris Kozinsky, and Giovanni Pizzi, *AiiDA 1.0, a scalable computational infrastructure for automated reproducible workflows and data provenance*, Scientific Data **7**, 300 (2020); DOI: `10.1038/s41597-020-00638-4 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-00638-4>`_

.. highlights:: Martin Uhrin, Sebastiaan. P. Huber, Jusong Yu, Nicola Marzari, and Giovanni Pizzi, *Workflows in AiiDA: Engineering a high-throughput, event-based engine for robust and modular computational workflows*, Computational Materials Science **187**, 110086 (2021); DOI: `10.1016/j.commatsci.2020.110086 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2020.110086>`_

If the ADES concepts are referenced, please also cite:

.. highlights:: Pizzi, Giovanni, Andrea Cepellotti, Riccardo Sabatini, Nicola Marzari, and Boris Kozinsky. *AiiDA: automated interactive infrastructure and database for computational science*, Computational Materials Science **111**, 218-230 (2016); DOI: `10.1016/j.commatsci.2015.09.013 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2015.09.013>`_


================
Acknowledgements
================

AiiDA is supported by the `MARVEL National Centre of Competence in Research`_, the `MaX European Centre of Excellence`_ and by a number of other supporting projects, partners and institutions, whose complete list is available on the `AiiDA website acknowledgements page`_.

AiiDA is a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project. Visit `numfocus.org`_ for more information.


.. _AiiDA: http://www.aiida.net
.. _MARVEL National Centre of Competence in Research: http://www.marvel-nccr.ch
.. _MaX European Centre of Excellence: http://www.max-centre.eu
.. _AiiDA website acknowledgements page: http://www.aiida.net/acknowledgements/
.. _numfocus.org: https://www.numfocus.org

Commit message:

Add developer guide from wiki content
Revive the `docs/source/developer_guide/` section (previously excluded
from the Sphinx build) with content migrated from the GitHub wiki.
Add AGENTS.md and CONTRIBUTING.md at the repo root.

docs/source/index.rst, after:

:sd_hide_title:

.. HTML meta tag to verify aiida.readthedocs.io in Google Search Console (aiidateam account)
.. meta::
   :google-site-verification: wLcoklPmiTRQs5TXRD6At5hNXGYSwexWnx0wygU4Uxk

.. grid::
   :reverse:
   :gutter: 2 3 3 3
   :margin: 1 2 1 2

   .. grid-item::
      :columns: 12 4 4 4

      .. image:: images/aiida-icon.svg
         :width: 200px
         :class: sd-m-auto

   .. grid-item::
      :columns: 12 8 8 8
      :child-align: justify
      :class: sd-fs-5

      .. rubric:: AiiDA

      An open-source Python infrastructure to help researchers with automating, managing, persisting, sharing and
      reproducing the complex workflows associated with modern computational science and all associated data (see :ref:`features<intro>`).

      **aiida-core version:** |release|

------------------------------

.. grid:: 1 2 2 2
   :gutter: 3

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`circle-play;mr-1` Introduction
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Overview of what AiiDA is and what it can do.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: intro/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the introduction

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`rocket;mr-1` Installation
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Installation guides and troubleshooting.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: installation/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the installation guides

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`info-circle;mr-1` Tutorials
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Concrete step-by-step examples.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: tutorials/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the tutorials

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`question-circle;mr-1` How-To Guides
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Learn how to use AiiDA to power your own work.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: howto/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the how-to guides

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`bookmark;mr-1` Topics
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Background information on AiiDA concepts.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: topics/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the topics

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`sitemap;mr-1` Internal Architecture
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Detailed information on AiiDA's design and architecture.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: internals/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the architecture guide

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`puzzle-piece;mr-1` Core plugins
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Commonly used AiiDA plugins to extend core functionality

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: reference/core_plugins
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the plugin overview

   .. grid-item-card:: :fa:`cogs;mr-1` API Reference
      :text-align: center
      :shadow: md

      Comprehensive documentation of CLI, Python API and REST API.

      +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

      .. button-ref:: reference/index
         :ref-type: doc
         :click-parent:
         :expand:
         :color: primary
         :outline:

         To the reference guide

------------------------------

.. admonition:: Need support?
   :class: title-icon-code-fork

   For any questions, discussions and requests for support, please visit the `Discourse forum <https://aiida.discourse.group>`__.


.. admonition:: Development Contributions
   :class: title-icon-code-fork

   Saw a typo in the documentation? Want to improve the code?
   Help is always welcome, get started with the :doc:`developer guide <developer_guide/index>`.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :hidden:

   intro/index
   installation/index
   tutorials/index
   howto/index
   topics/index
   internals/index
   developer_guide/index
   reference/core_plugins
   reference/index

===========
How to cite
===========

If you use AiiDA for your research, please cite the following work:

.. highlights:: Sebastiaan. P. Huber, Spyros Zoupanos, Martin Uhrin, Leopold Talirz, Leonid Kahle, Rico Häuselmann, Dominik Gresch, Tiziano Müller, Aliaksandr V. Yakutovich, Casper W. Andersen, Francisco F. Ramirez, Carl S. Adorf, Fernando Gargiulo, Snehal Kumbhar, Elsa Passaro, Conrad Johnston, Andrius Merkys, Andrea Cepellotti, Nicolas Mounet, Nicola Marzari, Boris Kozinsky, and Giovanni Pizzi, *AiiDA 1.0, a scalable computational infrastructure for automated reproducible workflows and data provenance*, Scientific Data **7**, 300 (2020); DOI: `10.1038/s41597-020-00638-4 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-00638-4>`_

.. highlights:: Martin Uhrin, Sebastiaan. P. Huber, Jusong Yu, Nicola Marzari, and Giovanni Pizzi, *Workflows in AiiDA: Engineering a high-throughput, event-based engine for robust and modular computational workflows*, Computational Materials Science **187**, 110086 (2021); DOI: `10.1016/j.commatsci.2020.110086 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2020.110086>`_

If the ADES concepts are referenced, please also cite:

.. highlights:: Pizzi, Giovanni, Andrea Cepellotti, Riccardo Sabatini, Nicola Marzari, and Boris Kozinsky. *AiiDA: automated interactive infrastructure and database for computational science*, Computational Materials Science **111**, 218-230 (2016); DOI: `10.1016/j.commatsci.2015.09.013 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2015.09.013>`_


================
Acknowledgements
================

AiiDA is supported by the `MARVEL National Centre of Competence in Research`_, the `MaX European Centre of Excellence`_ and by a number of other supporting projects, partners and institutions, whose complete list is available on the `AiiDA website acknowledgements page`_.

AiiDA is a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project. Visit `numfocus.org`_ for more information.


.. _AiiDA: http://www.aiida.net
.. _MARVEL National Centre of Competence in Research: http://www.marvel-nccr.ch
.. _MaX European Centre of Excellence: http://www.max-centre.eu
.. _AiiDA website acknowledgements page: http://www.aiida.net/acknowledgements/
.. _numfocus.org: https://www.numfocus.org
