developer_guide/core/transport.rst topics/transport.rst
developer_guide/core/extend_restapi.rst internals/rest_api.rst
get_started/index.rst intro/get_started.rst
get_started/computers.rst howto/run_codes.rst
get_started/codes.rst howto/run_codes.rst
howto/plugins.rst howto/plugins_develop.rst
import_export/main.html internals/data_storage.rst
install/quick_installation.rst intro/get_started.rst
install/prerequisites.rst intro/get_started.rst
install/installation.rst intro/get_started.rst
install/configuration.rst howto/installation.rst
install/updating_installation.rst howto/installation.rst
install/troubleshooting.rst intro/troubleshooting.rst
restapi/index.rst reference/rest_api.rst
verdi/verdi_user_guide.rst topics/cli.rst
working_with_aiida/index.rst howto/index.rst
working_with_aiida/python_api.rst reference/api/public.rst
working_with_aiida/resultmanager.rst howto/exploring.rst
working_with_aiida/scripting.rst howto/interact.rst
datatypes/index.rst topics/data_types.rst
datatypes/functionality.rst topics/data_types.rst
datatypes/kpoints.rst topics/data_types.rst
datatypes/bands.rst topics/data_types.rst
backup/index.rst howto/installation.rst

# fix https://www.materialscloud.org/dmp
apidoc/aiida.orm.rst reference/apidoc/aiida.orm.rst
querying/querybuilder/usage.rst howto/data.rst
# datatypes/index.rst TO BE ADDED IN #4469

# in most viewed but no longer part of the documentation
developer_guide/git_cheatsheet.rst external_redirects.rst
developer_guide/sphinx_cheatsheet.rst external_redirects.rst
examples/cp_tutorial.rst external_redirects.rst
examples/ph_tutorial.rst external_redirects.rst
examples/pw_tutorial.rst external_redirects.rst
examples/wannier90_tutorial.rst external_redirects.rst
