- plan, timeline?
-> Mbx here until end of June, Alex away May & June, then here for 4 more months
-> Alternatively, fall (EB preference)
- show workgraph code in teaser?
- by coding week, we have the story line
- by end of april, story line fixed
- possibly another coding week end of May, begin of June
- comparison table between core and WG, make analogous possibly? calcjob / workchain, process nodes
- `verdi workchain`? we have `verdi process` and `verdi calcjob` (not high priority)
- `pip install aiida` -> metapackage, does it exist rn? talk to alex, possibly also ali
- specific people where it makes sense, invite to coding week
- teaser module: possibly just use the "highlights" from the new website, as a teaser, not have this in the tutorial modules
- summary at the end of session
-

## WG notes
- possibility, `@task` and `@calcfunction`, two decorators, vs. `@task.calcfunction` decorator
- exporting, link rules, e.g., for exporting. Verify how this is handled in core, e.g., instance checks for WorkChain and CalcJob, but that's missing WorkGraph
- Verify archive exporting, in general
- Verify behavior in jupyter notebooks
-

## Larger TODOs
- No RMQ broker not blocking -> doesn't change story line of tutorial
- RestAPI not a target for tutorial, separate module (consumer for RestAPI is the GUI)
- GUI? Slightly higher priority (than TUI)
- WG submission (drop run/submit, also build?)
- Git like behavior! (verdi init)
-

## Current TOC
- Mod 0: Introduce the running example we use throughout. Keep it minimal, only show required inputs. Run that without AiiDA, the script directly (the current "Introduction" becomes part of that)
- Mod 1:
  - AiiDA via `aiida-shell`, basic AiiDA benefits (`verdi process list`, show provenance graph, `verdi process dump`)
- Mod 2: Interacting with data:
  - A) basic data types (Mod 1 via `ShellJob` of `aiida-shell`, only shows file in -> process -> file out)
  - B) more datatypes, introduce calcfunctions (the two following bullet points here are kind of "parameter sweep without aiida", and "parameter sweep the aiida way"):
    - We now show a python for-loop, to run a parameter sweep. From these results, people can already get a plot of the transition property (can you check which property?).
    - now, instead of file in -> file out, we can have a calcfunction that takes a dict as an input, and creates the required input file for our "external code", and the same, for the output, a calcfunction that parses the created output file, and creates an aiida XyData from it. That leads to richer provenance, and allows people to directly query exactly for the data, via aiida. it registers the inputs and outputs as aiida data nodes, rather than just file in & file out.
- Mod 3: Writing simple workflows
  - Now, based on the "manual workflow" from before (python for loop), we gradually wrap things in aiida (workgraph) workflows: first, the two calcfunctions and actuall simulation execution, as one workgraph, so that they are grouped together, then, in the second half of this module, we also show how the for-loop can be brought into the aiida world, via workgraph. this allows us to show the global, large provenance graph for the whole workflow, and introduce branching for workflows

- more advanced workflow concepts, e.g., if/while control flow elements will come in later modules then
